Add Programming model documentation (#3432)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/understand/programming_model.rst

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter explains the HIP programming model, the contract
                between the programmer and the compiler/runtime executing the
                code, how it maps to the hardware.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, API design

*******************************************************************************
Programming Model
*******************************************************************************

The HIP programming model makes it as easy as reasonably possible to map

> data-parallel C/C++ algorithms and map them to massively parallel, wide SIMD

Reviewer: repetition
```suggestion
The HIP programming model makes it as easy as reasonably possible to map
data-parallel C/C++ algorithms to massively parallel, wide SIMD
```

architectures, such as GPUs. As a consequence, one needs a basic understanding
of the underlying device architecture to make efficient use of HIP and GPGPU
(General Purpose Graphics Processing Unit) programming in general.

RDNA & CDNA Architecture Summary
===============================================================================

Most GPU architectures, much like RDNA and CDNA have a hierarchical structure.

> The inner-most piece is some Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inner-most piece is a Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) enabled
```
I think it's okay to use the singular here, as this doesn't imply, that it's the only SIMD, just that it's one of many pieces. Alternatively you could switch piece with "building block"

vector Arithmetic Logical Unit (ALU). Most recent GPUs beside the vector ALU

> also house some matrix ALU for accelerating algorithms of well defined shapes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also house matrix ALUs for accelerating algorithms of well defined shapes.
```
Also, and this is nit-picking, I'm not sure if "well defined shapes" is the right wording. The shape is not that important once the matrices surpass the minimum size needed to use the matrix ALUs. Then not the whole operation might be offloaded to the matrix ALUs, but it would still "accelerate" them, even if only partially. "[...] for accelerating matrix multiplications." is the easiest way out, but then again, it doesn't add much information.

Author: The "matrix ALU" already implies what it's meant to accelerate, but I wouldn't want to corner myself too much with the definition. As is with any fixed-function hardware, people always try to find way to use them for what it's not meant for: [exhibit A](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.11287).

Reviewer: Yes, I agree, but "algorithms" is too broad of a term for my taste. The linked paper even states

> any computation that can be expressed as MMA operations can leverage TCs

so "accelerating algorithms involving matrix-multiply accumulate operations" or "accelerating algorithms representable as matrix-multiply operations" is more precise, while not leaving the "unorthodox" use cases out

Reviewer: Reworded the section, also added scalar ALU, as it is needed for the description of the CUs

> Some number of vector and matrix ALUs comprise a larger block, often referred

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A number of vector and matrix ALUs comprise a larger block, often referred
```
And maybe add "The exact number of vector and matrix ALUs per Compute Unit depends on the architecture."

to as a Compute Unit (OpenCL, AMD block diagrams) but is referred to as Multi
Processor in HIP terms.

.. _rdna3_cu:

.. figure:: ../data/understand/programming_model/rdna3_cu.png
  :alt: Block diagram showing components mostly duplicated on the upper and
        lower halves of the image with some spanning over both parts (hinting
        at them being shared). Both the top and the bottom have two sets of
        identical hardware blocks. a "Scheduler" having "Vector GPR"s with an
        associated Vector ALU with the following noted capabilities:
        Float/INT/Matrix SIMD32, Float/Matrix SIMD32, Transcendental SIMD8, AI

>         MATRIX Accelerator, DPFP (1). Both top and bottom have a single "Ray

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Float/INT/Matrix SIMD32, Float/Matrix SIMD32, Transcendental SIMD8, AI
        MATRIX Accelerator, double precision Floating-Point. Both top and bottom have a single "Ray
```
This list is a bit overkill for a screen reader imo, but I'm not too versed in that. But still, the "(1)"  definitely doesn't belong in there, and DPFP is an abbreviation I've never heard, and also hasn't been explained previously. If it means what I think it means, I would write that out, or just ommit it. The list could probably also be shortened, the capabilities of the SIMD32s are slightly redundant, at least when the list is all the information one is given

Reviewer: Reworded

        Accelerator", "Texture Filters" and "LD/ST/Tex Addr" and L0 blocks.
        Shared among top and bottom are "Scalar Cache", "Shader Instruction
        Cache" and Shared Memory.

  Block Diagram of an RDNA3 Compute Unit.

.. _cdna3_cu:

.. figure:: ../data/understand/programming_model/cdna3_cu.png
  :alt: Block diagram showing components: "Scheduler", "Local Data Share",
        "Matrix Core Unit", "Shader Core" and "L1 Cache" along with some
        unnamed blocks.

>   Block Diagram of an CDNA3 Compute Unit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Block Diagram of a CDNA3 Compute Unit.
```

> For hardware implementation's sake, some number of Multi Processors are grouped

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For hardware implementation's sake, multiple Compute Units are grouped
```

together into a Shader Engine or Compute Engine, typically sharing some fixed
function units or memory subsystem resources.

.. _cdna2_gcd:

.. figure:: ../data/understand/programming_model/cdna2_gcd.png
  :alt: Block diagram showing four "Compute Engine"s each with 28 "CU"s
        (Compute Unit) inside. These four Compute Engines share one block of
        "L2 Cache and Controllers". Around them are four "Memory Controller"s,
        each having a "Memory Phy" block next to them. To the top and bottom of
        all these are eight blocks of "Infinity Fabric Link" with one of the
        eight reading "Infinity Fabric or PCIe". Two sole "VCN" blocks sit in

>         top corners. At the very bottom spans a colored seaction reading

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
        top corners. At the very bottom spans a colored section reading
```

        "Infinity Fabric" along with its logo.

  Block Diagram of a CDNA2 Graphics Compute Die.

Single Instruction Multiple Threads
===============================================================================

The SIMT programming model behind the HIP device-side execution is a
middle-ground between SMT (Simultaneous Multi-Threading) programming known from
multi-core CPUs, and SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) programming
mostly known from exploiting relevant instruction sets on CPUs (eg.
SSE/AVX/Neon).

> A HIP device compiler maps our SIMT code written in HIP C++ to an inherently

Reviewer: This is a change of tone from the previous sections. "the" could also be ommited
```suggestion
A HIP device compiler maps (the) SIMT code written in HIP C++ to an inherently
```

Reviewer: Fixed

SIMD architecture (like GPUs) not by exploiting data parallelism within a
single instance of a kernel and spreading identical instructions over the SIMD
engines at hand, but by scalarizing the entire kernel and issuing the scalar
instructions of multiple kernel instances to each of the SIMD engine lanes.

Consider the following kernel

.. code:: cu

  __global__ void k(float4* a, const float4* b)
  {
    int tid = threadIdx.x;
    int bid = blockIdx.x;
    int dim = blockDim.x;
  
    a[tid] += (tid + bid - dim) * b[tid];
  }

The incoming four-vector of floating-point values ``a`` is multiplied by a

> scalar and then multiplied element-wise by another four-vector. On modern

Reviewer: This description is not right, `b` is multiplied by the scalar and then added to `a`.

Also I'm not sure if it's a good idea to introduce the vector types at the same time as trying to explain the concept of "vecotrizing" the code. That's an additional layer of parallelism added on top

Reviewer: Fixed

SIMD-capable architectures the four-vector ops are expected to compile to a
single SIMD instruction. GPU execution of this kernel however will typically
look the following:

.. _simt:

.. figure:: ../data/understand/programming_model/simt.svg
  :alt: Two large arrows pointing downward with blocks inside and ellipses
        between the arrows. Inside the arrows the same series of blocks with
        the following texts inside from top to bottom: "ADD", "DIV", "FMA",
        "FMA", "FMA" and "FMA".

  Instruction flow of the sample SIMT program.

In HIP, lanes of a SIMD architecture are fed by mapping threads of a SIMT
execution, one thread down each lane of a SIMD engine. Execution parallelism

> isn't exploited from the width of the built-in vector types, but via the thread

Reviewer: This is where presenting ILP and TLP at the same time can become complicated - there are vector instructions, that can also be executed in parallel

Reviewer: Slightly reworded

id constants ``threadIdx.x``, ``blockIdx.x``, etc. For more details, refer to
:ref:`inherent_thread_model`.

Heterogenous Programming
===============================================================================

The HIP programming model assumes two execution contexts. One is referred to as
*host* while compute kernels execute on a *device*. These contexts have
different capabilities, therefor slightly different rules apply. The *host*
execution is defined by the C++ abstract machine, while *device* execution
follows the HIP model, primarily defined by SIMT. These execution contexts in
code are signified by the ``__host__`` and ``__device__`` decorators. There are
a few key differences between the two:

* The C++ abstract machine assumes a unified memory address space, meaning that
  one can always access any given address in memory (assuming the absence of
  data races). HIP however introduces several memory namespaces, an address
  from one means nothing in another. Moreover not all address spaces are
  accessible from all contexts.

>   If one were to look at {ref}`cdna2_gcd` and inside the {ref}`cdna3_cu`,

Reviewer: These references are not being rendered correctly

  every Compute Unit has an instance of storage backing the namespace
  ``__shared__``. Even if the host were to have access to these regions of
  memory, the performance benefits of the segmented memory subsystem are

>   supported by the inability of meaningful asynchronous accesss from the host.

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
  supported by the inability of meaningful asynchronous access from the host.
```

* Not all C++ language features map cleanly to typical device architectures,
  some are very expensive (meaning: slow) to implement on GPU devices, therefor
  they are forbidden in device contexts to avoid users tapping into features
  unexpectedly decimating their program's performance. Offload devices targeted
  by HIP aren't general purpose devices, at least not in the sense a CPU is.
  HIP focuses on data parallel computations and as such caters to throughput
  optimized architectures, such as GPUs or accelerators derived from GPU
  architectures.

> * Asynchrony is at the forefront of the HIP API. Computations launched by HIP
>   execute asynchronously on the device and it is the user's responsibility to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Asynchrony is at the forefront of the HIP API. Computations launched on the device
  execute asynchronously with respect to the host and it is the user's responsibility to
```
I think it's important to emphasize, that the execution is not asynchronously on the device tiself

  synchronize their data dispatch/fetch with computations on the device. HIP
  does perform implicit synchronization on occasions, but unlike some APIs

>   (OpenCL, SYCL) by and large places the onus of synchronization on the user.

Reviewer: Simpler wording
```suggestion
  (OpenCL, SYCL) by and large places the responsibility of synchronization on the user.
```
